# PEM v1

Version 1 of the JANUS Hall Thruster Predictive Engineering Model, as described in [Marks et al. J. Appl. Phys. 138, 153305 (2025)](https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article/138/15/153305/3368713/Uncertainty-quantification-of-a-multi-component)

## Example usage (SPT-100)
Clone this repository
```
git clone https://github.com/JANUS-Institute/pemv1.git
```
Clone the JANUS SPT-100 data repository from https://github.com/JANUS-Institute/pem_data, then make sure that the thruster definition in configs/pemv1_spt100.yml points to the correct location.
By default, it expects the `pem_data` repo alongside the `pemv1` repo, but this can be placed anywhere as long as the config file is changed appropriately. 
```
git clone https://github.com/JANUS-Institute/pemv_data.git
```
Enter the directory
```
cd pemv1
````

### Using `uv`
Create a virtual environment
```
uv venv
```
Install julia (if needed) and HallThruster.jl.
This will create a fresh julia environment called hallthruster_{VERSION} where {VERSION} is the version of HallThruster.jl specified in the config file.
By default, this is v0.18.7, which was the version used in the paper.
```
uv run scripts/install_hallthruster.py --hallthruster-version={VERSION}
```
Note that uv will automatically install the needed dependencies.
You may need to restart your shell after running the above to ensure the correct environment variables are set.
Next, you can run the mcmc script (here using only ion velocity data from Macdonald-Tenenbaum et al.).
```
uv run scripts/run_mcmc.py --datasets ../pem_data/data/SPT-100/tenenbaum/data.py --output-dir=output --max-samples=10
```
This will run the DRAM sampler for 10 steps, placing the resulting samples in `output/mcmc`

### Run MCMC
The script `run_mcmc.py` will run Markov Chain Monte Carlo for a provided thruster-cathode-plume system and list of datasets.

Requires a valid YAML config file specifying the system.
The outputs are written to a folder called mcmc if no output directory is specified, and a folder called `{output-dir}/pem_{timestamp}/mcmc` if `output-dir` is provided.
That folder in turn contains folders (numbered 000000 - num_samples) that hold the model outputs for each sample generated during MCMC.
Additionally, each sample, the value of the associated log posterior probability density function, and whether it was accepted are written to a file called mcmc.csv in the main mcmc directory.

For usage details and a full list of options, run `pdm run scripts/run_mcmc.py --help`

### Analyze MCMC results
The `analyze_mcmc.py` script is used to analyze results generated by `run_mcmc.py`.
Requires a base_directory containing an `mcmc` subdirectory with MCMC results.
Generates several types of plots and analysis in the base directory / `mcmc_analysis`

#### Standard MCMC analyses
- Traces for each parameter
- Corner plot (if sufficient samples)

#### Prediction plots with 50 and 90% credible intervals
- Ion velocity across pressures
- Ion current density across pressures
- Thrust vs pressure
- Discharge current vs pressure
- Cathode coupling voltage vs pressure

#### Restarts and others
- MAP, mean, median, final parameters
- Empirical covariance

For usage details and a full list of options , run 'pdm run scripts/mcmc_analysis.py --help'

#### Generate plots for publication
The `pemv1_make_plots.py` script generates additional plots for publication, particularly plots that compare multiple MCMC runs to each other.

## TODO:
- [ ] Port analysis and plotting over to new library format

## Citation

```bib
@article{Marks_2025_UncertaintyQuantification,
	doi = {10.1063/5.0283796},
	url = {https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article/138/15/153305/3368713/Uncertainty-quantification-of-a-multi-component},
	author = {Marks, Thomas A. and Eckels, Joshua D. and Mora, Gabriel A. and
	          Gorodetsky, Alex A.},
	title = {Uncertainty quantification of a multi-component {Hall} thruster
	         model at varying facility pressures},
	journal = {Journal of Applied Physics},
	volume = {138},
	number = {15},
	year = {2025},
}
```
